docs: Using ExternalDNS with the Helm chart (#1663)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/manage/kubernetes/networking/configure-external-access-loadbalancer.mdx

![A client connects to a Pod through a load balancer](/img/loadbalancer.png)

:::note
The Helm chart adds the `spec.selector.statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-name` setting to each LoadBalancer Service so that each targets only one Redpanda broker. Each Pod in a StatefulSet is automatically given the `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-name` label, which contains the name of the Pod. By setting the `spec.selector.statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-name` field of the LoadBalancer Service to the name of a Pod, it makes the LoadBalancer Service target only the individual Redpanda broker and not the whole cluster.
:::

## Prerequisites

- One worker node for each Redpanda broker that you want to deploy.

- Install [rpk](../../../../get-started/rpk-install) on your local machine so that you can test connections to your Redpanda cluster from outside Kubernetes.

- Make sure that your Kubernetes cluster is accessible through your desired node port range. You may need to edit your inbound firewall rules.

> - If you want brokers to advertise a custom domain, you must have a domain from a domain registrar.

Reviewer: I don't know if you care, but this isn't entirely true. I can use `redpanda.joe` as long as I point my client at the nameservers that serve it. `joe` isn't a valid TLD but neither external-dns nor route53 care if it's valid.

Author: Clarified in https://github.com/redpanda-data/documentation/pull/1663/commits/ebce97623eb4c564e6e64bf2e8a949990c41bd69

Author: ```
- If you want brokers to advertise a custom domain, you must have control over the DNS settings for that domain.

  :::tip
  For internal testing, you can use any domain without owning that domain, as long as:

  - Your local DNS server is configured to resolve that domain to the correct IP address.
  - Your client systems are configured to use your DNS server for resolution.

  For production, it's best to buy a domain from a domain registrar. This way, your domain is resolvable without any additional client-side configuration.
  :::
```

import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import ValuesYaml from '../shared/_values-yaml.mdx'

Setting up external access to your Redpanda cluster allows your applications running outside the Kubernetes cluster to communicate with Redpanda and produce and consume events. By default, the fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) that brokers advertise are their internal addresses within the Kubernetes cluster, which are not reachable from outside the cluster. To make the cluster accessible from outside, each broker must advertise a FQDN that can be reached from outside the cluster.

> When the `external.type` field is set to `LoadBalancer`, the Helm chart creates one LoadBalancer Service for each replica in the StatefulSet. Each LoadBalancer Service routes external traffic to the listener ports on a single Redpanda broker. To set up external access using this NodePort Service, you must configure the brokers to advertise addresses that resolve to the load balancer instances.

Reviewer 2: What/which is `this NodePort Service`, should it be `this LoadBalancer Service`?

Author: Thanks, this should be LoadBalancer Services. Updated.

> When the `external.type` field is set to `LoadBalancer`, the Helm chart creates one LoadBalancer Service for each replica in the StatefulSet. Each LoadBalancer Service routes external traffic to the listener ports on a single Redpanda broker. To set up external access using this NodePort Service, you must configure the brokers to advertise addresses that resolve to the load balancer instances.

Author: ```suggestion
When the `external.type` field is set to `LoadBalancer`, the Helm chart creates one LoadBalancer Service for each replica in the StatefulSet. Each LoadBalancer Service routes external traffic to the listener ports on a single Redpanda broker. To set up external access using LoadBalancer Services, you must configure the brokers to advertise addresses that resolve to the load balancer instances.
```

:::

## Prerequisites

- One worker node for each Redpanda broker that you want to deploy.

- Install [rpk](../../../../get-started/rpk-install) on your local machine so that you can test connections to your Redpanda cluster from outside Kubernetes.

- Make sure that your Kubernetes cluster is accessible through your desired node port range. You may need to edit your inbound firewall rules.

- If you want brokers to advertise a custom domain, you must have control over the DNS settings for that domain.

  :::tip
  For internal testing, you can use any domain without owning that domain, as long as:

  - Your local DNS server is configured to resolve that domain to the correct IP address.
  - Your client systems are configured to use your DNS server for resolution.

  For production, it's best to buy a domain from a domain registrar. This way, your domain is resolvable without any additional client-side configuration.
  :::

## Advertise a custom domain

> To configure your Redpanda brokers to advertise a custom domain, each broker must also have a hostname that points to the address of the broker's corresonding load balancer instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure your Redpanda brokers to advertise a custom domain, each broker must also have a hostname that points to the address of the broker's corresponding load balancer instance.
```

### Advertise the default Redpanda subdomains

> By default, the Helm chart gives each broker a subdomain that consists of the chart name and the Pod ordinal. For example, `redpanda-0`, where `redpanda` is the chart name and `0` is the Pod ordinal. To configure brokers to advertise these subdomains, you must configure the brokers with a custom domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the Helm chart gives each broker a hostname that consists of the helm release name and the Pod ordinal. For example, `redpanda-0`, where `redpanda` is the helm release name and `0` is the Pod ordinal. To configure brokers to advertise these hosts on a subdomain, you must configure an external domain.
```

  <ValuesYaml path="external"/>
  :::

1. [Create a DNS record](#create-dns-records) for each of your default subdomains.

### Advertise custom subdomains

> You can give each Redpanda broker a custom subdomain to advertise instead of the default subdomains. Custom subdomains can either be suffixed with the Pod ordinal or they can be fully custom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can give each Redpanda broker a custom fqdn to advertise instead of the default hostnames. Custom hostnames can either be suffixed with the Pod ordinal or they can be fully custom.
```

I'm not sure if this is true. Can you really give each pod its own custom fqdn? This statement is a little confusing.

#### Advertise fully custom subdomains

> 1. Add your subdomains to the `external.addresses` setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add your FQDNs to the `external.addresses` setting.
```

Reviewer: Shouldn't we start with the easy way and have they set the `external.domain` instead of the error-prone "name each pod" method?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/redpanda-data/documentation/commit/ebce97623eb4c564e6e64bf2e8a949990c41bd69
